[THEME MUSIC]
>>GREGG BRADEN: My
name's Gregg Braden.
And I'd like to welcome you to
this very special presentation
of "Missing Links, the Deep
Truth of our Origin, History,
Destiny and Fate".
In the last episode,
we discovered
how the best science of the
20th and now the 21st century
has overturned the key tenet
of Darwin's idea of evolution,
survival of the strongest.
Now we know that
nature is actually
based upon a model of
cooperation and mutual aid, not
the competition and
conflict and the struggle
that we've been led to
believe in the past.
Well, in this episode we'll
take this idea one step further.
We'll explore the science,
the new science that
takes our personal connection
to the earth to the most
intimate level yet.
And it all begins with what
you've already learned,
the harmony between our
heart and our brain.
Throughout this
series, there have
been some common
themes that have
woven each episode together.
One of those themes is that we
are living a time of extremes,
a rare convergence of cycles
that are changing our world
and the way that we need to
think and live in our world.
Another theme is that those
who have come before us,
our ancestors, they understood
these cycles of time
and they understood
that they would
need to change their
lives in order to embrace
that change in a healthy way.
And they left us the keys to
help us to do that in our time
today.
And another one
of those themes is
that we are the product
of something that
is so mysterious in our past.
It is the union, the
merging, the fusion
of DNA, the DNA that
makes us who we are,
human chromosome number 2, and
the fusion of those telomeres
that created within us the
ability to experience life
in this world in a way that
no other life can experience
in this world, the ability to
tap our intuition on demand,
to access our
subconscious on demand,
to turn on our immune response,
to tap that anti-aging hormone
response, and much, much more.
One of the pieces that we
have not yet talked about
is something that I want to
share with you right now.
And although that
we're sharing it
at this point in
the program, it is
a principle that applies to
every episode that we've had
so far.
It's all about resilience.
Resilience is our ability
to embrace big change
in a healthy way.
When we talk about
personal resilience,
you can actually think
of it as the batteries.
You can think of it as
the emotional batteries,
the psychological batteries,
even the physical batteries
in your body, and
the charge that
needs to be maintained so
that you can respond to life
in a healthy, in a healthy
way when the universe brings
change right to your doorstep.
Now we don't always know what's
going to happen in the world.
And we can't always
determine what the world
is going to bring to us.
But we can, with
absolute certainty,
determine how we respond to
what the world shows to us.
Because as we
master the potential
for tremendous super
resilience within ourselves,
we feel confident.
It gives us the
confidence that we
can embrace whatever
change the world brings
to us in a healthy way and
we can do it again and again
and again.
So I want to be
really clear with you
about where I'm
coming from on this.
You already have
resilience in your life.
We all do.
You have the resilience
that's helped you,
to this moment in your life, to
deal with whatever changes life
has brought to you.
But if you can think of
resilience as a curve,
what researchers tell us is
that we embrace change typically
in a way that follows a curve in
a very specific way over about
a 60-day period.
When we're faced with a
new challenge in our lives,
something unexpected comes up,
the caring for an aging parent,
for example, the
loss of a loved one,
those are negative
experiences, but it
can be positive experiences.
The embracing of a new job, the
embracing of a new discovery
and carrying that discovery
out in the stages all
over the world.
All of those require resilience.
Here's what the
researchers tell us.
In that curve of
resilience, typically when
we're faced with a new
challenge, good or bad, what
we do is about the first
10 days of that challenge,
we're up for it.
We've got the emotional,
the psychological
and the physical energy.
And the curve is a steep curve.
It looks like this.
Something begins to happen
after about that 10 days.
Because we cannot sustain that
level of intensity for long
periods of time, typically--
everyone's different--
typically, we begin to plateau.
We see that plateau and
our energy levels even out.
And if we are not
trained, if we don't
know how to manage
that resilience,
our energy levels begin
to drop off very quickly,
and we call it
emotional exhaustion.
Now I know this
personally in my own life.
My mother's health has declined.
And it happened faster than
I expected it to happen,
and it happened sooner in life.
I always thought we'd have
a lot more time together.
I'm a researcher.
I'm a scientist.
I'm a scholar.
So when I first saw the signs of
what was happening with my mom,
I was all over the information.
I was on the
internet every night,
researching what's been
discovered, what can we do.
Is there anything
that we can do?
And I followed this
curve almost to a T.
That first week or 10
days, my energy levels,
tremendously high.
Then I began to plateau.
And I could feel it in my body.
But here's the key.
Where some people
would drop off quickly
with emotional exhaustion,
I had the benefit
of the tools that you
now have, as well.
Because the heart-brain
harmony that we have already
experienced and that you've
learned the techniques
for in previous
episodes, that is
the harmony that also gives
us greater resilience in life.
I practice, in my life,
what I share with you.
And because I did,
this is the result.
While you still have
a curve of resilience,
the heart-brain harmony
allows us to raise
that curve in our life.
It allows us to sustain,
in a healthy way, the way
that we are dealing
with that change.
And it all comes down to
how we deal with resilience
and what it actually
means in our lives.
And this is what I want to
talk to you about right now.
Because this idea of resilience,
it means different things
to different people.
I want to get right to
the heart of resilience.
Not surprisingly, resilience
begins in your heart.
It begins in the human heart.
If you've ever been
to a doctor and you've
had an electrocardiogram,
used to be called an EKG,
today they're called
ECGs, but they are still
the electrocardiogram.
It's the electrical
printout of your heartbeat.
And that printout will show
you a series of patterns.
The pattern has
a little squiggle
and then it has a
big spike and then it
drops and some more little
squiggles, a big spike,
and then it drops.
Those little squiggles,
that big spike, and the drop
is called the QRS complex.
Q, the letter Q, letter R,
and the letter S complex.
And the R is the
spike, the R wave.
Typically, if we don't know
what we're looking for--
and I see people do
this all the time--
if we don't know what
we're looking for
and you're lying there on the
cot in the doctor's office
and you turn your
head, because you
want to see what
your EKG looks like,
and we typically are expecting
this very regular rhythm.
We're saying, is my
heartbeat regular?
What you're looking
for is how much time
elapses from the peak of
one R wave to the next.
How much time, how
quickly one spike happens
and then the next spike
and the next spike.
Well, we typically are
looking for this regularity.
But the truth is, that's
probably the last thing
that you really want.
And here's the reason why.
Resilience is all about
the variability, not
the regularity.
The more variability
that you have
from one R wave to the next,
from one peak to the next
to the next, the
more variability
you have, the greater
your resilience to life.
The more heart rate
variability you have,
the greater your
resilience to life.
And it is actually called
heart rate variability,
or abbreviated H-R-V.
So this heart rate variability,
this idea of heart rate
variability, it changes
throughout our lives.
It changes over time.
But I want you to
know right now,
you are not locked
into that change.
You are not bound to the change
that we commonly see in people
as they get older.
It can happen if we do not do
anything to change our heart
rate variability.
So when we are young, when we
first come into this world,
we have to figure out
things really quickly.
We've got to respond to
the world really quickly.
And nature gives us
a way to do that.
And we do it by having high
heart rate variability.
When you first come
into this world,
you've got to figure
stuff out fast.
You have to figure
out, for example,
that not every dog in every
living room is as friendly,
maybe, as the dog
in your living room.
And you've got to figure
out when a stove top is hot
and when it's not.
Because sometimes it's hot,
but it's not glowing red,
and you don't always know
when that's going to be.
You've got to figure that
stuff out really quickly.
So nature gives you high heart
rate variability early in life.
And this is typically
what we see.
The younger that people
are, we generally
see more of this heart
rate variability.
But here's what happens.
As we get older--
and I know you've heard
this term before--
as we get older, the tendency is
that we become set in our ways.
Or another way to
think of that is we
become rigid in our thinking.
We expect the world to
behave in certain ways.
We expect people to do
things in a certain way.
And that expectation,
the emotional expectation
of the world being the
way it has always been,
translates into the
rhythm of our heart.
When we become rigid in our
thinking and our expectation,
our heartbeat
becomes more regular
and we lose the variability.
We lose our heart
rate variability.
And this is why change is
often hard for older people.
Not always, but it can be.
Tell you, one of the most
amazing examples of this for me
was my grandfather.
I was very close
to my grandfather.
My father left my family
when I was 10 years old.
I didn't know him very well.
And I became closer
to my grandfather
than I ever was to my father,
because I knew him longer,
and we shared
deeply, deep talks,
deep conversations
about the world
and the experiences of life.
And my grandfather lived
until he was 96 years old.
And I wasn't with him
the moment that he
died during his 96th year,
but I was with him the week
that he passed.
I didn't know that
he was going to pass.
He seemed OK when I saw him.
But I had a sense, maybe
something was going on.
And I asked him.
I happened to ask him
on that last visit,
I said, grandpa,
you're 96 years old,
you've seen 96 years of
change in this world.
What has it meant to you?
What can you tell me?
And he looked at me with
this look that he always had.
And when he would smile,
his ears would wiggle.
I remember it.
And I miss that.
But what he said to me, smiled,
his ears wiggled a little bit,
and he said, Gregg, there was a
time when this world made sense
to me.
He said, there was a time
that I felt like I belonged.
I understood the world.
I understood how things worked.
I understood the people around
me and the way they think,
because they think the
way that I was thinking.
He said, but then
something changed.
Something began to happen.
And it was right around
the time of World War II.
And I wasn't surprised
when I heard the timing,
because war typically
propels us with innovation
and new technology
and new discoveries
and new inventions
that quickly are
embraced by the general public.
And that's exactly what
happened in World War II.
All of a sudden,
we had technology
we had never had before.
And my grandfather could never
keep up with that technology.
He couldn't understand,
for example, simple things.
He couldn't understand how
you put a piece of paper
into a fax machine in
an office in one city
and that piece of
paper comes out,
and all the information
is there on the fax
machine in another city.
It didn't make sense to him.
Because digital data
never made sense to him.
Lasers didn't make sense to him.
Coherent light waves
didn't make sense.
The way that jet planes
fly, in his lifetime,
he went from no
planes to jumbo jets,
and he could never understand
how something that big
could move in the air and
contain the fuel that it takes
to move fast enough to do that.
He said, I got lost.
He said, Gregg, I
got lost in my world.
He said, I'm no longer
a part of this world.
It doesn't make sense
to me any longer.
And at the end of that
week, my grandfather died.
And he died feeling like a
stranger in his own world.
And then maybe that
feeling contributed
to why he was no longer here.
He didn't have the
feeling and the connection
and the will to be
here any longer.
So I'm saying this to you,
because change was hard
for my grandfather, always
very hard for my grandfather.
He was so rigid in his thinking.
He wanted the world to be the
way it was before World War II,
before all those
changes happened.
And he used to
fight that change.
His heart rate
variability, no surprise,
when I went with
him to the doctor
and I would see that EKG,
his heart rate variability
looked like endless squiggles.
They weren't the big, deep
heart waves of someone
who's younger can embrace
the change in a healthy way.
It was the heartbeat of someone
who's lived to see a long life
and is struggling with accepting
and embracing the world
as it is now being
presented to him.
So heart rate variability.
How do we change that?
Well, the good news is you can.
You can change at
any time in life.
My grandfather,
if he had chosen,
could have embraced that
heart rate variability
in his life and the ability
to change his own heart
rate variability.
And how do you do that?
As I mentioned just a moment
ago, you already know how.
When we harmonize our
heart and our brain
together, when we shift our
awareness and know our heart,
number one, when we slow
our breathing to about five
seconds in, five
seconds out, and we
breathe as if that breath is
coming from our heart, number
two, and we begin to feel
the feelings of coherence,
the feelings of gratitude,
appreciation, compassion, care,
those kinds of feelings,
and we establish
the communication between
the heart and the brain--
0.1 Hertz is the talk between
when you can feel the
feelings create 0.1 Hertz,
you're harmonizing your
heart and your brain.
And in addition to everything
else that we've already said,
in addition to all of the
other benefits of intuition
and subconscious access
and all of those things,
super learning, triggering
the immune response,
triggering your
anti-aging hormones,
in addition to all
of those things,
you are creating more
resilience in your life.
The more you practice this
technique, the greater
resilience you
have in your life.
So I'd like to take
this conversation now
to an even deeper level.
By going deeper, it's
going to also go global.
Because what we now know is
that the act of us having
this experience, this
heart-brain harmony, not only
does it create coherence
within our bodies,
it is also the key
to creating coherence
in the field that
connects all things.
And as you'll see
in a moment, that
can be a really good thing.
Personal coherence is good.
We're talking about
global coherence,
and that's really good.
There is a magnetic field
that surrounds our planet.
And this magnetic field, the
magnetic field of the Earth, it
permeates all things.
Everything is part of this
magnetic field, every blade
of grass, every hamster,
every goldfish, every CEO
of every corporation, every
leader of every nation,
when it comes to the
magnetic fields of the Earth,
there is no them and
us, there is only we.
And that means we are all
connected by this field.
And what happens
in this field is
really important for all of us.
It's important to you and to me.
And it's important to the
scientists of the world who
monitor these kinds of things.
So right now, there
are two satellites
in the northern hemisphere.
And these are satellites
whose sole purpose
is to monitor the magnetic
fields of the Earth that
connect all things.
We want to know what's
happening to those fields.
The fields ebb and
flow over time.
And we're also discovering
now that these magnetic fields
of the Earth that
influence life on Earth
are influenced by
things that are not
on Earth, like solar cycles.
Earlier in this program,
in our very first episode,
you saw this.
You saw how scientists
were able to determine,
as the solar cycles
ebb and flow over time,
that human ingenuity, human
creativity, and big things
that humans have
created are directly
linked to the solar cycles.
The cycles of innovation
parallel the cycles of the sun
as they ebb and flow.
So you saw this.
But what you did not
see is why this happens.
Now that we've talked about the
magnetic fields of the Earth,
it's going to make
perfect sense.
Because the solar
cycles are also
based upon magnetic fields,
but they're on the sun.
When we talk about
sunspots, what
we see as sunspots
from the earth,
those spots are actually
magnetic fields on the sun.
The sun, our sun, does not
have a north and south pole,
like the Earth does, like Mars
and some of the other planets.
Our sun doesn't have a
single north and south pole.
What it has is many
north and south poles
that are specific to
each magnetic field,
or what we call magnetic storm
that is happening on the sun.
So when the sun goes
through a period of time
where the sunspot
cycle is high, it
means there are a lot of
magnetic storms on the sun,
so it's not
surprising that would
influence the magnetic
fields of the Earth.
This is where the
biology comes into it.
The strongest magnetic field
in your body, the strongest
biological magnetic field
is not in your brain,
it's in your heart.
Your brain has a magnetic field.
The heart is much,
much stronger.
So now we're seeing a link.
Magnetic fields of the sun,
magnetic fields of the Earth,
magnetic fields of the heart.
Now you can see why
we would be influenced
by these solar cycles.
So this relationship
is one of the reasons
that scientists are
interested in tracking
what it is that's happening
in the magnetic fields
of the Earth.
Well, this is
another place where
our conversation about the
false assumptions of science
is going to be really
important and it
comes into play with why what
I'm about to describe to you
was a mystery originally
to scientists.
It took a tragedy,
unfortunately,
for scientists to really wake up
to how deep this connection is
between us and the magnetic
fields of the Earth,
between our hearts and the
magnetic fields of the Earth.
The information that comes
back from these satellites,
it is charted every
day, two satellites,
called the geosynchronous
orbital satellites, or GOES,
G-O-E-S, for short.
We have GOES number one
and GOES number two.
What you're seeing
on your screen
is a chart that shows
these magnetic fields being
plotted as a result of what
the satellites have sent to us.
And each box represents
a 24-hour period of time.
So you can see, every 24 hours,
they ebb, they flow, they ebb
and they flow.
Scientists know this.
One of the satellite's
data is in red,
the other one is in blue.
One day, as scientists
were watching this data,
there was a huge
spike that happened.
And the scientists are saying,
we've never seen that before,
what on Earth?
And what on Earth is happening
to the magnetic fields
of the Earth to
create this spike?
So they took the data
and they overlaid it
onto a calendar of time.
So they could see what
date that spike occurred.
And it's probably
no surprise to you,
because I've referenced
this in the past.
It was a big surprise
to the scientists.
That spike happened at
9:00 AM Eastern Standard
Time, September 11,
2001, 15 minutes
after the first plane hit the
first tower of the World Trade
Center.
The reason this is important
is because scientists believe
it took about 15 minutes for
the images of the tragedy
to travel through the media,
through the satellites
and the televisions, all around
the world for people to see,
and that the magnetic
spike that we
were seeing from the satellites
measuring Earth's field
was actually the result of
hundreds of thousands, probably
millions or even
billions of people
watching the data in the same
moment in time simultaneously.
Hundreds of thousands,
millions or billions of people
are watching the tragedy
through the media,
and they are having a
heart-based response
to what they're seeing,
an emotional response.
Now a lot of different
responses, some were angry,
some were afraid,
some were saddened.
The key is they were all
heart-based experiences.
All of a sudden, from a
purely physics point of view,
we have hundreds,
possibly millions
of human magnetic
fields from the heart
that are now
collectively feeding
the greater magnetic field of
the Earth, spiking that field.
Now this is a surprise
to scientists,
because their
conditioning, as you
saw earlier in this episode,
or earlier in this series,
is that we are separate
from the Earth.
And if we're separate,
there's no way
that humans could influence the
magnetic field of the planet.
So scientists weren't
expecting this.
This was the wake up
call that said, my god,
look, not only are we
connected, but we're
so deeply connected that we can
influence the magnetic field
of an entire planet.
Here's why that's important.
If you remember what
happened on the Earth,
in major population centers
all over the world, at least
for the first few
days after 9/11,
there was more cooperation,
there was more harmony.
We were truly a family, at
least for a couple of days.
People looked at one another
on the streets of major cities.
They made eye contact.
They hugged one another.
We felt like families, one
of the most peaceful times
in recent times,
in modern times,
in the history of the world.
Why did that happen?
Scientists attribute
that harmony
to the spike in the magnetic
fields of the Earth.
And here's why.
When the magnetic
fields are strong,
people are less aggressive,
people are more cooperative,
they're more willing
to work together
to solve their problems.
When the magnetics are weak,
people become more aggressive,
conflict becomes more available.
Doesn't mean it has
to happen, but there's
more of a tendency toward that.
When those magnetic fields are
low, we are more aggressive.
So the elevation of
the magnetic fields
created a temporary aura
of peace upon the Earth.
And that was the
trigger to scientists.
They said, can we
duplicate the effect
without having the tragedy?
Can we create a strong
magnetic field on the earth
without having something
sad and horrible
to elicit this experience
in people's hearts?
Well, the answer is, yes.
And that's where we're going
with this whole exercise
that we're talking about here.
I mentioned earlier
the Institute
of HeartMath, the
pioneering research
institute in
northern California,
studying the human heart
in non-conventional ways
that typically aren't
even acknowledged
in many universities
and medical schools.
They're the ones that discovered
the magnetic field of the heart
is so much stronger
than the brain
and that the heart has
this intuitive ability
to learn and think and
sense and feel and remember,
separate from the brain itself.
So it's not surprising that
the Institute of HeartMath
would be the ones
to pioneer the study
that I'm about to
share with you.
And for transparency, I
want to be very, very clear
on my relationship to HeartMath.
I am not their employee.
I have been closely
affiliated with HeartMath
for almost 20 years now,
almost since their inception
on the West Coast.
We are friends.
We've toured together.
We share information together.
They've given me permission to
share their research with you
in this program.
And I am on the steering
committee for a project
that I'm going to share with
you right now, because I believe
in it and I think it
hold perhaps the greatest
hope for peace and harmony
in our world today.
It is called the Global
Coherence Initiative,
or shortened to GCI.
Personal coherence is good.
Global coherence is really good.
What the Global Coherence
Initiative is telling
us is that strong
collective emotion
has a measurable impact on the
magnetic fields of the Earth.
That's a fact, and
we know that now.
So what HeartMath opted to do
was two things, two phases.
First, to build a
project, and I'm
going to read the mission
statement word for word
to you for this project,
to build a project
to create that
coherence and to be
able to measure the coherence
in a scientific way,
so that we know when
we're effective.
Here's the mission
statement for this project.
The Global Coherence
Project is the first
of its kind
science-based initiative
that is designed for
only one purpose.
The purpose is "to
unite millions of people
from varied beliefs
and varied cultures,
from all over the world, to
shift global consciousness
from instability and chaos
to balance and cooperation."
This is the first of its kind,
science-based initiative that
is designed solely for the
purpose of what I've just
shared with you.
Its only reason for existing is
to create harmony and balance
in the conscious fields
that connect all things.
And that begins in the magnetic
fields that connect all things.
The thinking is this--
it's a very simple model--
but HeartMath's
thinking is that when
we can create personal coherence
in our own lives, in our homes,
in our families,
with our children,
in the workplace
and the classroom,
that we begin to build
social coherence,
because that harmony is
reflected in those around us.
And if we do this on
a large enough scale,
it becomes the
global coherence that
gives us the
environment to keep this
going in our personal lives.
It's much easier to live
this kind of coherence
when we are surrounded
by other people that
share the same belief.
So the Global Coherence
Initiative was born.
GCI.
It is two phases.
The first phase is the
scientific documentation,
the instrumentation that allows
scientists for the first time
to measure these
fields independently
of any other organization.
This is not linked to a weather
satellite or communications
satellite or a
military satellite.
We wanted to build
the sensors to be
able to tell us what the fields
of the Earth are really doing.
Satellites are expensive.
So HeartMath opted to
build ground-based sensors.
And what you're seeing
on your screen right now,
this is the image of one
of the first sensors,
as it was large, about four
feet tall, and a little awkward.
It worked very well.
But as happens so
often, the innovation
moved quickly to
much smaller sensors.
And now the sensors are
actually based in the ground.
And the image you're
seeing on your screen
is the ground-based image of
what that actually looks like.
The sensors are still
being built, the network,
but right now, there's one
in northern California,
one on the East
Coast in New York.
There's one in the UK,
one in Saudi Arabia,
and there is one right
now in New Zealand.
This is the network so far.
Additional sensors are proposed,
but with what we have so far,
we're able to bring back data
every day, just like you're
seeing on your screen.
And this is telling us when the
fields of the Earth are quiet
and when they're active.
This is telling us when
we are in coherence
and when we're not.
The beauty of this
entire project
is that we now have a
tool, using the best
science of the
modern world, based
on the wisdom of 5,000 years of
human experience, that hearkens
back to our most ancient and
cherished spiritual traditions,
that tells us if
we can find a way
to marry our heart and
our brain together,
in doing so we create the
field of peace and harmony
in our world that
actually encourages
the cooperation that it takes
to bring nations together
in our time of extremes.
I can't think of
anything more beautiful,
a more beautiful symmetry.
The knowledge of our
intimate connection
with the Earth that's come
from the Global Coherence
Initiative, it empowers us in a
way that's never been possible
in the modern world.
And for me, this is what gives
me a reason to be optimistic.
It gives me the realistic
hope that together, we'll
create the best possible
world and that we'll
see that world in our lifetime.
I hope you have enjoyed watching
this program as much as I've
enjoyed creating this program.
And I want to thank
you for joining me
for "Missing Links: The Deep
Truth of our Origin, History,
Destiny and Fate".
[THEME MUSIC]
Hello, my name's
Gregg Braden.
I want to take this opportunity
to thank you for watching
this very first season
of Missing Links
and I just hope you have
enjoyed watching it
as much as I have enjoyed
putting this together
I have spent a tremendous amount
of time and energy
sifting through a tremendous
amount of information,
weaving it into the story
that I just shared with you
through this series.
It's our story.
It's about you and me.
It's the new human story,
and we are just beginning.
So I'm going to invite you
to stay tuned
for these future episodes.
We're going to do more of the
Q&A where you get to ask me
the questions about what
you have just learned
through this series
means to you and your life
So until next time,
I want to thank you
for joining me on
Missing Links.